Early planning studies of the Montopolis neighborhood envisioned the area as being eventually built out as single-family with commercial uses limited to highway commercial on U.S. 183 and a few neighborhood convenience nodes. In contrast, the 1985 Montopolis Area Study recommended a future land use pattern that would accommodate industrial expansion occurring in the area and which recognized the impacts of noise from nearby Bergstrom Air Force Base. The eastern edge of the study area, contains a mix of single-family, industrial and commercial zoning.

Today, as Austin makes its metamorphosis into a metropolitan region covering five counties, Montopolis is becoming less isolated. Although few major projects have been completed in the study area over the last ten years, there is a steady and increasing level of activity to the west and southwest. Development projects stimulated by the construction of Austin BergstromAirport will undoubtedly create additional impacts over the next few years.
Major parkland acquisition along the Colorado River and the ACC Riverside campus forms a partial buffer against intensive multi-family and commercial development along Pleasant Valley Rd. In contrast, no natural buffer exists between the Montopolis neighborhood and the growing industrial area along Ben White Blvd. Certain sites within the Montopolis study area and adjacent to it along the freeways have the potential for non-residential development. The proximity of the airport and freeways makes these areas appropriate for some non-residential development. As sites with direct access to the emerging freeway system become rare, however, other large undeveloped tracts may be considered as potential sites for non-residential development.

In district E1, the most common Neighborhood complaints are property abatement complaints. For multifamily, structure condition complains lead, and Land-use violations comprise the majority of the commercial workload.


Source:  Montopolis Neighborhood Plan