The main focus of City and neighborhood efforts is to retain the historical and cultural identity of the E5 while encouraging new development. The four neighborhood plans (East Cesar Chavez , Central East Austin, Holly, and Govalle) attempt to preserve the traditional neighborhood character while encouraging walkability and connectivity to surrounding commercial districts. 
Interest in reconnecting East Fifth and Sixth streets to downtown has brought entertainment across the highway and opened new opportunities for locally owned restaurants and music venues, housing, and commercial properties. Other efforts to reconnect East Austin include a MetroRail stop at Plaza Saltillo, several B-Cycle community bicycle stations, designation of 11th street as a “gateway” to East Austin and improvements to pedestrian walkways. The City’s Imagine Austin comprehensive plan designates Seventh Street as a Neighborhood Center where City and community efforts focus on creating an area that is walkable, bikable, and supported by transit. 
Renewed interest in the area comes with its own set of challenges for existing neighborhoods. Many properties owned by families for generations are now facing market pressures in the form of increased property taxes and property maintenance costs. Affordability is a growing concern for residents, as is the changing landscape of social networks and community businesses.

The NE5 & NE9 districts are located adjacent to downtown in central East Austin. The neighborhood is a predominantly residential area with approximately 70% of the total land use identified as single-family residential. The districts contain two historic districts as well as a State cemetery. There are three principal commercial corridors – 11th Street, Cesar Chavez and Sixth Street – as well as commercial uses along the IH-35 access road. Housing in the area 
New development is occurring throughout the two districts, especially along East Fifth, Sixth, and 11th Streets. The Saltillo rail station at Fifth and Chicon has stimulated private development in surrounding areas, including several mixed use projects and reuse of existing warehouse space. Infill of vacant residential lots and redevelopment of existing housing stock can be found throughout established neighborhoods. 
Future development is governed by several small area plans, including the four neighborhood plans, the Plaza Saltillo Station Area Plan and Regulating Plan, two Neighborhood Conservation Combining Districts, and Subchapters E and F. All of these efforts work together in an effort to improve the development quality of the rapidly changing East Austin neighborhoods and to help ensure a cohesive development pattern throughout the neighborhoods.
