Property-abatement cases dominate the neighborhood workload in Distict N7, while structure-condition cases comprise the vast majority of multifamily. Structure condition cases are also the majority of commercial cases.


A large majority of the housing stock in N7 was built in the 1950s and the 1960s. This district  is an established urban area; there is
very little vacant land available for additional
development or preservation as open
space. However, extensive changes to impervious
cover amounts in the planning area
could affect infrastructure needs and may
affect drainage and water quality of area
creeks. The ethnicities of residents in the district have shifted significantly over time as
well. Many of these residents have since moved out of the area and a more diverse
group of people and families have replaced them. The Hispanic population has grown significantly, and Hispanics are now the largest share of the districts population. The presence of a large lower income population in
the planning area may be due to the large stock of older housing, which is affordable
to these residents. Most multi-family structures in this district are rented; and
much of the lower-income population in the district lives in these structures. Additional
residential and commercial redevelopment is anticipated in the planning area,
especially along major corridors such as 51st Street and Cameron Road. Tannehill
Creek runs parallel to 51st Street and through Bartholomew Park. Erosion mitigation
projects including landscaping have recently been completed along the banks of Tannehill Creek. Fort Branch Creek is also a major creek within
N7. Tributaries join the
main body of Fort Branch Creek near Blanton
Elementary. From there the creek flows southeast
and crosses Manor Road. In 2000, the
City’s Watershed Protection and Development
Review Department completed a watershed
master plan. The plan indicated that
Fort Branch Creek was a priority area for addressing
flooding and erosion problems. In
2003, the City replaced bridges over the
creek at Manor Road and Westminster Drive to reduce roadway flooding.

Source:  Windsor Park Neighborhood Plan